Key constraints

What is a key

Typically a database table has an attribute, or a combination of multiple attributes, whose values are unique across the whole table. Such attributes identify a record uniquely. 
Normally, a table, as a whole, only contains unique records. Meaning that the combination of all attributes is a key in itself. However it's not called a key, but a superkey, if attributes of that combination can be removed, and the attributes still uniquely identify records. 
If all possible attributes are removed but the records are still uniquely identifiable by the remaining attributes, we speak of a minimal superkey. This is the actual key. A key is always minimal.
The minimal superkeys are called candidate keys. At the end, only one can be chosen as key for the table. This has to be chosen from the candidates. 


Consider a scenario

you don't know which columns or combinations of columns are suited as keys. There's a simple way of finding out whether a certain column (or a combination) contains only unique values – and thus identifies the records in the table.
We have to wrap the SELECT DISTINCT query within the COUNT() function and we can see the unique rows of given columns. 

SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT(column_a, column_b, ...))
FROM table;


Example

Get to know SELECT COUNT DISTINCT

Find out the number of rows in universities table.

-- Count the number of rows in universities
SELECT COUNT(*)
FROM universities;

find out how many unique values there are in the university_city column.

-- Count the number of distinct values in the university_city column
SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT(university_city)) 
FROM universities;


Identify keys with SELECT COUNT DISTINCT
There's a very basic way of finding out what qualifies for a key in an existing, populated table:

Count the distinct records for all possible combinations of columns. 
If the resulting number x equals the number of all rows in the table for a combination, you have discovered a superkey.

Then remove one column after another until you can no longer remove columns without seeing the number x decrease. 
If that is the case, you have discovered a (candidate) key.

The table professors has 551 rows. It has only one possible candidate key, which is a combination of two attributes.


-- Try out different combinations
SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT(firstname,lastname,university_shortname)) 
FROM professors;

Result

count
551

-- Try out different combinations
SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT(firstname,lastname)) 
FROM professors;

Result

count
551


-- Try out different combinations
SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT(firstname)) 
FROM professors;

count
360


So, here we can confirm that the combination of firstname and lastname is a key. since remove lastname reduces the count of rows


Primay Keys

One primary key per database table, chosen from candidate keys
Primary keys need to be defined on columns that don't accept duplicate or null values. 
It should uniquely identifies records, e.g for referencing in other tables. 
Unique and not-constraints both apply to primary keys
Primary keys are time-invariant. Meaning that they must hold for current data in the table but also for any future data that the table might hold. 
so choose the primary key column wisely.
Specifying PRIMARY KEY upon table creation is very easy.  

ex:

CREATE TABLE tablename(
col_a integer
col_b PRIMARY KEY
);

If we want two columns to be primary key. Note that, it is still one primary key but formed in combination of two columns. 
Ideally though PRIMARY KEY consists of few columns as possible. Best is to have 1 column as PRIMARY KEY. 

CREATE TABLE table_name (
col_a INTEGER
PRIMARY KEY (col_b, col_c)
);


Adding primary key constraint to existing column is similar as adding unique constraint. 

ALTER TABLE table_name
ADD CONSTRAINT constraint_name PRIMARY KEY (column_name)

Examples


ADD key CONSTRAINTs to the tables
Two of the tables in your database already have well-suited candidate keys consisting of one column each: organizations and universities
 with the organization and university_shortname columns, respectively.
 
 rename these columns to id using the RENAME COLUMN command and then specify primary key constraints for them. 
 This is as straightforward as adding unique constraints
 
 Step1:
 Rename the organization column to id in organizations.
 Make id a primary key and name it organization_pk.
 
 
 -- Rename the organization column to id
ALTER TABLE organizations
RENAME COLUMN organization TO id;

-- Make id a primary key
ALTER TABLE organizations
ADD CONSTRAINT organization_pk PRIMARY KEY (id);


Step2:

Rename the university_shortname column to id in universities.
Make id a primary key and name it university_pk.

-- Rename the university_shortname column to id
ALTER TABLE universities
RENAME COLUMN university_shortname TO id;

-- Make id a primary key
ALTER TABLE universities
ADD CONSTRAINT university_pk PRIMARY KEY(id);



Surrogate keys

Surrogate keys are sort of artifical primary key on data.
In other words they are not based on native column in data but on a column that just exists for sake having a primary key. 
There are several ways of constructing a surrogate key. 
SERIAL is a datatype that allows the addition of auto-incrementing numbers to an existing table. It is specified just like any other data type. 
Once we add a column with the "SERIAL" type, all the records in the table will be numbered. 
Whenever we add a new record to the table, it will automatically get a number taht does not exist yet. 
Another strategy for creatign a surrogate key is to combine two existing columns into a new one. 


Add a SERIAL surrogate key

Since there's no single column candidate key in professors (only a composite key candidate consisting of firstname, lastname), 
you'll add a new column id to that table.

This column has a special data type serial, which turns the column into an auto-incrementing number. 
This means that, whenever you add a new professor to the table, 
it will automatically get an id that does not exist yet in the table: a perfect primary key!


Add a new column id with data type serial to the professors table.

-- Add the new column to the table
ALTER TABLE professors
ADD COLUMN id SERIAL;


Make id a primary key and name it professors_pkey.

-- Make id a primary key
ALTER TABLE professors
ADD CONSTRAINT professors_pkey PRIMARY KEY (id);

Write a query that returns all the columns and 10 rows from professors.

-- Have a look at the first 10 rows of professors
SELECT * FROM professors
LIMIT 10;



CONCATenate columns to a surrogate key

Another strategy to add a surrogate key to an existing table is to concatenate existing columns with the CONCAT() function.

Let's think of the following example table:

CREATE TABLE cars (
 make varchar(64) NOT NULL,
 model varchar(64) NOT NULL,
 mpg integer NOT NULL
)

The table is populated with 10 rows of completely fictional data.

Unfortunately, the table doesn't have a primary key yet. 
None of the columns consists of only unique values, so some columns can be combined to form a key.

combine make and model into such a surrogate key.

Steps

Count the number of distinct rows with a combination of the make and model columns.

-- Count the number of distinct rows with columns make, model
SELECT COUNT (DISTINCT (make,model))
FROM cars;

Add a new column id with the data type varchar(128).

-- Add the id column
ALTER TABLE cars
ADD COLUMN id VARCHAR(128);

Concatenate make and model into id using an UPDATE table_name SET column_name = ... query and the CONCAT() function.

-- Update id with make + model
UPDATE cars
SET id = CONCAT(make, model);


Make id a primary key and name it id_pk.

-- Make id a primary key
ALTER TABLE cars
ADD CONSTRAINT id_pk PRIMARY KEY(id);

-- Have a look at the table
SELECT * FROM cars;


Test your knowledge before advancing
Before you move on to the next chapter, 
let's quickly review what you've learned so far about attributes and key constraints. 


Let's think of an entity type "student". A student has:

a last name consisting of up to 128 characters (required),
a unique social security number, consisting only of integers, that should serve as a key,
a phone number of fixed length 12, consisting of numbers and characters (but some students don't have one).

Instruction

Given the above description of a student entity, create a table students with the correct column types.
Add a PRIMARY KEY for the social security number ssn.
Note that there is no formal length requirement for the integer column. The application would have to make sure it's a correct SSN!

CREATE TABLE student (
 last_name VARCHAR(128)
 ssn INTEGER PRIMARY KEY
 phone_number CHAR(12)
)